---
title: 'How to Set up a Window Manager on Arch Linux'
date: 2020-03-18
permalink: /posts/2020/03/blog-post-3/
tags:
  - Arch
  - Linux
  - i3
  - Window Managers
---


A Quick Window Manager Install Guide for Arch Linux
===================================================

The steps for setting up most window managers are the same.
Choosing what window manager to use can be difficult, as there are so many options; however, I find that I always make my way back to i3-gaps (a verion of the i3 window manager that supports gaps) and cannot recommend it enough to those interested in using a window manager.
The amount of configuration and the simplicity of it is quite nice.
So, let's use i3 as example in this tutorial.


## Step 1: Install the Window Manager, Xorg, and Xinit

If you have installed Arch Linux, then this step may seem trivial; however, with window managers (and more often desktop environments) you will likely run into a few otions and i3 is no exception.
Simply type the following command to install i3:
```
$ sudo pacman -S i3 xorg-server xorg-xinit
```

You will be given some choices of packages to install. 
Personally, I prefer i3-gaps, so I type `1 3 4 5` and hit `enter`.


This is the same for most window managers that use X server.
Others, like sway, may use Wayland.
In that case, you would just need to install Wayland.


## Step 2: Copy and Edit .xinitrc

Now that you have i3, xorg, and xinit installed, you are gonna have to set up xinit.
To do this simply copy the xinitrc file from `/etc` into your user's home directory:
```
$ cp /etc/X11/xinit/xinitrc /home/<USER>/.xinitrc
```

Since this is a configuration file, you probably don't want it being displayed every time you check your home directory, so you can include a dot at the front of the file name.


Now, you just have to configure Xinit so that when X starts it executes i3.
You may wish to sign in as your user for this as there may be some issues 
This can be done by appending `exec i3` to the bottom of your user's `.xinitrc` file.
So, open the file with your favorite text editor:
```
$ nvim /home/<USER>/.xinitrc
```
And append the following line:
```
exec i3
```


## Step 3: Start X Server

Whenever you sign in as this user, you can now type the command `startx` to start the X server.
When X server starts, it will automatically execute i3 and you should see the window manager.
From here you can hit `Mod+Enter` to open up a terminal, then use the `i3-config-wizard` command to generate a basic i3 configuration.
Personally, I store mine in `.config/i3/config`, but you may want this file to be located at `.i3` in your home directory (for easy access).


## Conclusion

That is all there is.
Really, setting up a window manager is that easy, now all thats left is configuring it to your heart's desire. 
As mentioned before, i3 and other window managers offer a lot of customizability, and as a result of this they may seem a bit *lacking* at first.


So, here is a list of some programs I would recommend using to help spruce up whatever window manager you decide to use:
* [polybar](https://github.com/polybar/polybar) - A highly configurable status bar 
* [urxvt](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Rxvt-unicode) - An incredibly fast and customizable terminal emulator
* [neovim](https://github.com/neovim/neovim) - An absolutely fantastic text editor that has a plugin for just about everything you can imagine
* [ranger](https://github.com/ranger/ranger) - A terminal based filemanager, perfect for those who don't want to install all of KDE or Gtk just to move some files around
* [zathura](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Zathura) - A vim-like document viewer that supports many types of files including EPUBs, PDFs, and even Comic Books
* [pywal](https://github.com/dylanaraps/pywal) - A program that can generate and apply color schemes all over your system


I hope this post was helpful and wish you the best with using i3 or whatever window manager you prefer.


## References 

[Arch Wiki: i3](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/I3https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/i3)

