---
title: 'Installing Arch Linux'
date: 2020-01-09
permalink: /posts/2020/01/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Linux
---


How to install Arch Linux
===

Before we begin with the installation process, there are a few things I would like to get out of the way.
Below, I will be assuming that you have some knowledge of Linux; however, as this is a full tutorial, I will be explaining each step in full detail.
If you are not using a Linux system, then you can search for a tutorial on how to make a bootable USB or SD card for Windows or Mac systems and skip to step 2.
Next, I will use `$` to indicate commands executed with normal-user permissions and `#` to indicate commands executed with super-user permissions. 
Finally, you will need some things for this endeavor including the USB or SD card you will use to install the operating system, the computer in which you would like to install Arch Linux, an Ethernet connection, and a lot of patience.

Now, lets start installing Arch Linux.


## Step 1: Preparing the Installation Medium

To install Arch you must first prepare the USB or SD card with the ISO image.
Go to https://www.archlinux.org/download/, and select which region you would like to download the file from.
Once you have selected the mirror, download the file called archlinux-*version*-x86_64.iso.
This is the disk image that you will be installing on the USB or CD.

Next, you will need to verify the download. 
You can do this from a terminal by typing the following command:
```
$ echo "b4294ad607d3df9bf71775484accff133a77fdae *archlinux-2020.01.01-x86_64.iso" | sha1sum --check
```
You should receive the following output:
``` 
archlinux-2020.01.01-x86_64.iso: OK
```
If you do not receive this output, then try downloading the ISO file and checking it again.


Now that we have verified our ISO image, we can burn it to the USB or SD card.
Simply format the drive that you wish to burn the ISO to.
Then, type the following command (be sure to replace the X below with the letter of the drive you want to burn the ISO to):
```
$ sudo dd bs=1M if=archlinux-2020.01.01-x86_64.iso of=/dev/sdX conv=fsync
```
This should take quite a while, so sit back, relax, and drink a lot of coffee, cause the next step is where things start to get interesting.

## Step 2: Booting Into The Arch Linux ISO

Now that you have your installation medium ready to go, stick the USB or SD card in the computer in which you would like to install Arch Linux.
Boot up the computer and enter the BIOS configuration (for most computers you hit `f12`, `del`, `esc`, or a similar key while the computer is booting up.)
Next, choose to boot from your installation medium.

Once the device has booted successfully, you will see a black screen with a few options.
Select the first option and you will see another black screen with a prompt that looks like the following:
```
root@archiso ~ #
```
If you see this, then you are good to go and can begin the installation.

## Step 3: Setup For The Installation

Before we begin installing things, it's a good idea to check the status of your network.
You can type the following command to check this:
```
# ping -c 1 google.com
```
This command should return the following output:
```
PING google.com (172.217.4.78) 56(84) bytes of data.
64 bytes from google.com (172.217.4.78): icmp_seq=1 ttl=54 time=5.72 ms

--- google.com ping statistics ---
1 packets transmitted, 1 received, 0% packet loss, time 0ms
rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 5.721/5.721/5.721/0.000 ms
```
This means that you are connected to the internet and ready to move on to the next part of this step; however, if you recieve an output that looks like this:
```
ping: google.com: Temporary failure in name resolution
```
then check to make sure that your ethernet cable is connected correctly.

Next, you need to update the system clock.
You can do this with this simple command:
```
# timedatectl set-ntp true
```

## Step 4: Partitioning The Hard Drive 

**WARNING:** What you are about to do will wipe the data on your computer's drive.
If you have not backed up all of your files and data, then this is your last chance to turn back and do so.

Now that we have that out of the way, we can start the fun part.
First, check if you are using a UEFI system by running the command:
```
# ls /sys/firmware/efi
```
If it returns the contents of that directory, then you have a UEFI system.
If it does not return any output, then you are using BIOS.

Run fdisk to check your devices:
```
# fdisk -l
```
Note the device in which you wish to install Arch.

Now run cfdisk to partition the hard drive.
Replace the X below with the letter of the device you noted earlier:
```
# cfdisk /dev/sdX
```
Then, select `gpt`.


## Step 5: Chroot

